
Logo Informa


STAY UPDATED


NLP
Language models
Microsoft
Phi-2 defeated the 70 billion-parameter Llama 2 at coding and even trounced Gemini Nano, a small version of Google's latest LLM

Picture of Ben Wodecki
Ben Wodecki
December 14, 2023

2 Min Read
Photo of Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella
Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella
At a Glance
Microsoft has released technical details for Phi-2, its latest small but powerful language model.
Microsoft has launched the latest in its line of small open source language models: Phi-2. The model is just 2.7 billion parameter in size but outperforms models by up to 25 times its size.

Phi-2 is part of Microsoft’s Phi project, an attempt by its research team to make small, yet powerful language models. The project includes the 1.3 billion parameter Phi-1, which it said achieved state-of-the-art performance on Python coding among existing small language models, and Phi-1.5, which is adept at common sense reasoning and language understanding. The latter was also given multimodal capabilities from a November update.

Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella first offered a glimpse of Phi-2 at last month's Ignite event. The company has now released the model and also shared its technical details in a research blog post.

Phi-2 is available through the Azure AI Studio model catalog. It is also accessible via Hugging Face. Phi-2 cannot be used for commercial uses, however. Under its Microsoft Research license, Phi-2 can only be used for non-commercial, research-oriented endeavors. Any attempt to use these materials for commercial gain would be in violation of the license terms.

AI model performance
Phi-2 is larger than prior versions of Phi but is designed to be more powerful. It can achieve state-of-the-art performance akin to models with fewer than 13 billion parameters.

Related:Microsoft Makes Miniscule Model Multimodal Like ChatGPT's GPT-4V
The researchers said the model is also safer in terms of outputs compared to prior Phi models, despite it not undergoing alignment through reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). Microsoft claims the model shows better behavior in toxicity and bias compared to some existing models.

To achieve Phi’s improved performance, Microsoft researchers focused on what they call "textbook-quality" data for training, carefully selecting web data and utilizing synthetic datasets to power the model. Knowledge from Phi-1.5 was brought over for improved performance and accelerated training.

Phi-2 outperformed Meta’s Llama 2-7b and Mistral-7B across various benchmark tests covering capabilities such as commonsense reasoning. Phi-2 even surpassed the 70 billion parameter version of Llama 2 at coding.

“With its compact size, Phi-2 is an ideal playground for researchers, including for exploration around mechanistic interpretability, safety improvements, or fine-tuning experimentation on a variety of tasks,” according to Microsoft.



Microsoft researchers even tested Phi-2 against Gemini Nano, the newly announced small version of Google’s new flagship foundation model.

Related:Microsoft Unveils Its First Custom, In-house Chips
Gemini Nano is 500 million parameters larger than Phi-2. The Microsoft model defeated it in terms of scores on popular benchmark tests including BoolQ, MMLU and MBPP.



Read more about:

ChatGPT / Generative AI
About the Author(s)
Ben Wodecki
Ben Wodecki

Jr. Editor

Ben Wodecki is the Jr. Editor of AI Business, covering a wide range of AI content. Ben joined the team in March 2021 as assistant editor and was promoted to Jr. Editor. He has written for The New Statesman, Intellectual Property Magazine, and The Telegraph India, among others. He holds an MSc in Digital Journalism from Middlesex University.

Keep up with the ever-evolving AI landscape
Unlock exclusive AI content by subscribing to our newsletter!!
Stay Updated!
You May Also Like

Sorry! No recommendations to show
Latest News
Photo of an Air Canada plane
NLP
Air Canada Held Responsible for Chatbot’s Hallucinations
byDeborah Yao
Feb 20, 2024
2 Min Read
Snapshot of Hugging Face's assistant page
NLP
Hugging Face Debuts Open Source AI Assistant Builder
byDeborah Yao
Feb 20, 2024
4 Min Read
SoftBank building sign
NLP
AI Startup Roundup: SoftBank raising $100 Billion to Compete Against Nvidia
byDeborah Yao
Feb 19, 2024
2 Min Read
Quantum computer image
Responsible AI
AI Meets Quantum: Leap Forward for AI Models to ‘Understand’
byBen Wodecki
Feb 19, 2024
3 Min Read
Keep up with the ever-evolving AI landscape
Unlock exclusive AI content by subscribing to our newsletter!!
STAY UPDATED
Trending articles
Image of a person reading a book in the clouds
NLP
OpenAI Debuts ‘Insane Quality’ Video Generation Model
Feb 15, 2024

Gemini logo
NLP
Google's New Gemini 1.5 Can Handle 700,000 Words at a Time
Feb 15, 2024

Image of a profile of a head with letters AI written on it
NLP
OpenAI is Developing AI Agents
Feb 8, 2024

Abstract background with words 'small language models'
NLP
3 Most Common Problems with Small Language Models
Feb 16, 2024

Meta AI logo
ML
V-JEPA: Meta's Video AI Model Learns by Watching
Feb 15, 2024

Latest podcasts
Qantm AI CEO on AI Strategy, Governance and Avoiding Pitfalls

Feb 14, 2024
Deloitte AI Institute Head: 5 Steps to Prepare Enterprises for an AI Future

Jan 31, 2024
Athenahealth's Data Science Architect on Benefits of AI in Health Care

Jan 19, 2024
Dell EMEA CTO on AI and Multicloud

Jan 3, 2024
See all
AI Business logo
More from Informa Tech
The AI Summit Series
Applied Intelligence Live!
AI Research and Consulting
Our Solutions
Working with us
Advertise
Communicate
Contact us
About us
Join Us
STAY UPDATED
Follow Us
LinkedIn Logo
Facebook Logo
YouTube logo
Twitter logo




Informa Tech
Copyright © 2024 Informa PLC Informa UK Limited is a company registered in England and Wales with company number 1072954 whose registered office is 5 Howick Place, London, SW1P 1WG.

Home|
About us|
Contact|
Cookie Policy|
Terms of Use
Sign up for the AI Business newsletter
Our specialized newsletter equips you with the latest news, freshest insights and thought leadership in artificial intelligence.

Get ahead, stay updated - sign up today!

I need to keep up with AI, sign me up!
AI matters in business, sign me up!
No thanks, I do not want to sign up.