
tomorrow belongs to those who embrace it today


most popular


Home  Innovation  Artificial Intelligence
Microsoft unveils Phi-2, a small language model that packs power
Even though Google's Gemini Nano has only been out for a week, it already has some competition.
sabrina-ortiz
Written by Sabrina Ortiz, Editor
Dec. 14, 2023 at 11:59 a.m. PT
Phi-2 Microsoft Ignite
Microsoft
When you think of language models in relation to generative artificial intelligence (AI), the first term that probably comes to mind is large language model (LLM). These LLMs power most popular chatbots, such as ChatGPT, Bard, and Copilot. However, Microsoft's new language model is here to show that small language models (SLMs) have great promise in the generative AI space, too. 

On Wednesday, Microsoft released Phi-2, a small language model capable of common-sense reasoning and language understanding, and it's now available in the Azure AI Studio model catalog. 

Also: AI in 2023: A year of breakthroughs that left no human thing unchanged

Don't let the word small fool you, though. Phi-2 packs 2.7 billion parameters in its model, which is a big jump from Phi-1.5, which had 1.3 billion parameters. 

newsletters
ZDNET Tech Today
ZDNET's Tech Today newsletter is a daily briefing of the newest, most talked about stories, five days a week.
subscribe
see all
Despite its compactness, Phi-2 showcased "state-of-the-art performance" among language models with less than 13 billion parameters, and it even outperformed models up to 25 times larger on complex benchmarks, according to Microsoft. 

Also: Two breakthroughs made 2023 tech's most innovative year in over a decade

Phi-2 outperformed models -- including Meta's Llama-2, Mistral, and even Google's Gemini Nano 2, which is the smallest version of Google's most capable LLM, Gemini -- on several different benchmarks, as seen below. 

Microsoft
Phi-2's performance results are congruent with Microsoft's goal with Phi of developing an SLM with emergent capabilities and performance comparable to models on a much larger scale. 

Also: ChatGPT vs. Bing Chat vs. Google Bard: Which is the best AI chatbot?

"A question remains whether such emergent abilities can be achieved at a smaller scale using strategic choices for training, e.g., data selection," said Microsoft. 

"Our line of work with the Phi models aims to answer this question by training SLMs that achieve performance on par with models of much larger scale (yet still far from the frontier models)."

When training Phi-2, Microsoft was very selective about the data used. The company first used what it calls "text-book quality" data. Microsoft then augmented the language model database by adding carefully selected web data, which was filtered on educational value and content quality. 

So, why is Microsoft focused on SLMs? 

Also: These 5 major tech advances of 2023 were the biggest game-changers

SLMs are a cost-effective alternative to LLMs. Smaller models are also useful when they are being used for for a task that isn't demanding enough to require the power of an LLM. 

Furthermore, the computational power required to run SLMs is much less than LLMs. This reduced requirement means users don't necessarily have to invest in expensive GPUs to power their data-processing requirements.

artificial intelligence
Want to work in AI? How to pivot your career in 5 steps
AI breakthrough enables scientists to read Roman scrolls once buried by Mount Vesuvius
I just tried Google's ImageFX AI image generator, and I'm shocked at how good it is
5 reasons to sign up for Google Labs and how to do it
Editorial standards
show comments
 
we equip you to harness the power of disruptive innovation, at work and at home.
topics
galleries
videos
do not sell or share my personal information
about ZDNET
meet the team
sitemap
reprint policy
join | log in
newsletters
site assistance
licensing
© 2024 ZDNET, A Red Ventures company. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Cookie Settings | Advertise | Terms of Use